---
layout: inner
author: Steve
title: "Observations from the field: operations and strategy – aren't they the same?"
---
Quite often, we are invited to sit with our clients to discuss and review their strategy. The discussion almost always ends up with them asking us how we can help them be more operationally efficient so that they can reduce costs and be more competitive.  The discussion that is all too often missing, or even avoided, is what can they do differently from their competitors so that they gain a SUSTAINABLE advantage in the eyes of their customers. I often wonder why companies shy away from this part of the discussion and the only conclusion to which I can come is that it is avoided because it is too abstract. Cutting costs and driving efficiency is usually something that can be seen or touched. Reduce man hours, drive down prices from suppliers, outsource non-key functions, upgrade to more efficient machinery. All of this can be calculated. All of this can be done. And with all of this there is a more or less a direct cause and effect relationship that can be seen. If I reduce headcount, my costs will go down, which will enable me to slightly lower my prices which will make me more attractive to my customers. 

But what happens when your competition does the same? Your advantage is gone as are your margins. To be truly strategic a company must be more than just efficient. It must also be unique from its competitors: unique in the way it performs certain activities, unique in the actual activities it performs, unique in where it performs those activities etc. etc. And this uniqueness must be something that customers value. Being different for the sake of being different is not a sound strategy. These discussions, in my experience, are more difficult. Clients sometimes have a hard time identifying anything they do that makes them unique. Or, they find themselves being faced with situations when staying true to their uniqueness comes at the cost of turning away business from customers who don’t really value their uniqueness. These are uncomfortable predicaments with outcomes that are risky and not easily measured. The best executives navigate this uncertainty and find the balance between delivering short term profits and developing a long term competitive advantage. To be clear, I am not suggesting that driving efficiency and managing costs are not strategic, because they can be. But as an overall strategy efficiency on its own won’t stand for too long. 