---
layout: inner
author: Mike
title: 'A Higher Calling'
featured_image: '/images/mission-key.jpg'
excerpt: "Too often companies blame poor performance on the perception they can’t afford better people.  Leadership often correlates compensation with attitude and commitment.  No question there is a market value of each position based on experience, skills and responsibilities.   Trying to pay below market wages is a short-term gain, particularly with millennials, who are quite active in assessing their market value.<br/><br/>Where we need to put focus as leaders..."
---
Too often companies blame poor performance on the perception they can’t afford better people.  Leadership often correlates compensation with attitude and commitment.  No question there is a market value of each position based on experience, skills and responsibilities.   Trying to pay below market wages is a short-term gain, particularly with millennials, who are quite active in assessing their market value.

Where we need to put focus as leaders is drawing employees into mission, purpose and the key role they play.  To put this in perspective, I look at non-profit organizations, particularly religious organizations, where compensation levels are low, usually not close to the market value of services performed, if they are compensated.  Religious organizations often run on a large volunteer pool that is highly motivated, driven by purpose and often performing tasks outside of their education or work experience.  Certainly, there is a context of giving to the community or a spiritual foundation to their efforts.  This demonstrates heartfelt commitment to a purpose not monetarily driven, where they are engaged, self-driven and enthusiastic.  Those working for non-profit organizations see the meaningful role they play daily and clearly understanding how they fit into the success of the entire organization.  Key characteristics to non-profit employee motivation are frequent feedback and recognition.  These organizations find many ways to give recognition that usually cost little.

Our challenge as leaders is to communicate a sense of higher purpose, not merely trade time for a paycheck.  We must engage employees beyond the framework of typical human resource structures to bring out the innate human trait of needing to have a sense of purpose and belonging to a mission.  Our goal should be to have everyone around us arrive daily with the perspective of contributing rather than trading time.  Our responsibility is to provide a sense of the greater purpose and how all are contributors, not just another spoke on the wheel.  Finally, we must be accountable to give frequent feedback and recognition.
